Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence that allows computer systems to learn directly from examples, data, and experience. Through enabling computers to perform specific tasks intelligently, machine learning systems can carry out complex processes by learning from data, rather than following pre-programmed rules. Recent years have seen exciting advances in machine learning, which have raised its capabilities across a suite of applications. Increasing data availability has allowed machine learning systems to be trained on a large pool of examples, while increasing computer processing power has supported the analytical capabilities of these systems. Within the field itself there have also been algorithmic advances, which have given machine learning greater power. As a result of these advances, systems which only a few years ago performed at noticeably below-human levels can now outperform humans at some specific tasks. Many people now interact with systems based on machine learning every day, for example in image recognition systems, such as those used on social media; voice recognition systems, used by virtual personal assistants; and recommender systems, such as those used by online retailers. As the field develops further, machine learning shows promise of supporting potentially transformative advances in a range of areas, and the social and economic opportunities which follow are significant. In healthcare, machine learning is creating systems that can help doctors give more accurate or effective diagnoses for certain conditions. In transport, it is supporting the development of autonomous vehicles, and helping to make existing transport networks more efficient. For public services it has the potential to target support more effectively to those in need, or to tailor services to users. And in science, machine learning is helping to make sense of the vast amount of data available to researchers today, offering new insights into biology, physics, medicine, the social sciences, and more. The UK has a strong history of leadership in machine learning. From early thinkers in the field, through to recent commercial successes, the UK has supported excellence in research, which has contributed to the recent advances in machine learning that promise such potential. These strengths in research and development mean that the UK is well placed to take a leading role in the future development of machine learning. Ensuring the best possible environment for the safe and rapid deployment of machine learning will be essential for enhancing the UK’s economic groowth, wellbeing, and security, and for unlocking the value of ‘big data’. Action in key areas – shaping the data landscape, building skills, supporting business, and advancing research – can help create this environment. The recent success of machine learning owes no small part to the explosion of data that is available in some areas, such as image or speech recognition. This data has provided a vast number of examples, which machine learning systems can use to improve their performance. In turn, machine learning can help address the social and economic benefits expected from so-called ‘big data’, by extracting valuable information through advanced data analytics. Supporting the development of this function for machine learning requires an amenable data environment, based on open standards and frameworks or behaviours to ensure data availability across sectors. As machine learning systems become more ubiquitous, or significant in certain fields, three skills needs follow. Firstly, as daily interactions with machine learning become the norm for most people, a basic understanding of the use of data and these systems will become an important tool required by people of all ages and backgrounds. Introducing key concepts in machine learning at school can help ensure this. Secondly, to ensure that a range of sectors and professions have the absorptive capacity to use machine learning in ways that are useful for them, new mechanisms are needed to create a pool of informed users or practitioners. Thirdly, further support is needed to build advanced skills in machine learning. There is already high demand for people with advanced skills, with specialists in the field being highly sought after, and additional resources to increase this talent pool are critically needed. ‘No regrets’ steps in building digital literacy and informed users will also help prepare the UK for possible changes in the employment landscape, as the fields of machine learning, artificial intelligence, and robotics develop. There is a vast range of potential benefits from further uptake of machine learning across industry sectors, and the economic effects of this technology could play a central role in helping to address the UK’s productivity gap. Businesses of all sizes across sectors need to have access to appropriate support that helps them to understand the value of data and machine learning to their operations. To meet the demand for machine learning across industry sectors, the UK will need to support an active machine learning sector, which capitalises on the UK’s strength in this area, and its relative international competitive advantages. The UK’s start-up environment has nurtured a number of high-profile success stories in machine learning, and strategic consideration should be given to how to maximise the value of entrepreneurial activity in this space. The Royal Society conducted research to understand the views of members of the public towards machine learning. While most people were not aware of the term, they did know of some of its applications. There was not a single common view, with attitudes, both positive and negative, varying depending on the circumstances in which machine learning was being used. Ongoing engagement with the public will be important as the field develops. Machine learning applications can perform well at specific tasks. In many cases it can be used to augment human roles. Although it is clear that developments in machine learning will change the world of work, predicting how this will unfold is not straightforward, and existing studies differ substantially in their projections. While offering potential for new businesses or areas of the UK economy to thrive, the disruptive potential of machine learning brings with it challenges for society, and questions about its social consequences. Some of these challenges relate to the way in which new uses of data reframe traditional concepts of, for example, privacy or consent, while others relate to how people interact with machine learning systems. Careful stewardship will be needed to ensure that the productivity dividend from machine learning benefits all in society. Machine learning is a vibrant field of research, with a range of exciting areas for further development across different methods and applications. In addition to those areas of research that address purely technical questions, there is a collection of specific research questions where progress would directly address areas of public concern around machine learning, or constraints on its wider use. Support for research in these areas can therefore help ensure continued public confidence in the deployment of machine learning systems. These areas include algorithmic interpretability, robustness, privacy, fairness, inference of causality, human-machine interaction, and security.